FORTH CODING RULES

Created by Paul E. Bennett of Transport Control Technology Ltd.
Date of original: 23rd March 1995
Date last modified: 28th December 1996 (for the Forth Interest Group and
comp.lang.forth)

The following text is hereby given to the public domain for non-commercial
use by all programming with Forth. Non-commercial for the purposes of this
document shall mean not for profit reproduction of this text. Commercial
organizations may use this text as the basis of their own coding procedures
provided they do not then sell such procedures outside their own
organizations.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

As promised I am posting the Coding Rules, which have been modified from my
own company standard and with some modifications as applied to a recent
European Contract. The rules have been further edited to address a couple
more specific issues. The stack picture information is configured in such a
manner that automated tools can generate glossary entries. These stack
picture formats will require some additional words to be defined in systems
if they are used in source code. They are:

    (S adopts the function of ( unless used with the glossary tool
    (R adopts the function of ( unless used with the glossary tool
    (G adopts the function of ( unless used with the glossary tool

I shall, as soon as I am able, post some code, which will give an idea of
how the Glossary generation Tool was intended to work. I am writing it at
present (one of those jobs I intended to do for a long time now).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

TABLE OF CONTENTS

1.     INTRODUCTION
2.     SCOPE
3.     REFERENCE DOCUMENTS
4.     GLOSSARY OF TERMS
5.     SOFTWARE STANDARDS APPLICABLE
6.     SOFTWARE LISTING ORGANIZATION
6.1.   DOCUMENT AUDIT INFORMATION
6.1.1. TITLE BLOCK
6.1.2. INTRODUCTORY OUTLINE
6.1.3. EXPORTS
6.1.4. ENVIRONMENTAL DEPENDENCIES
6.1.5. REVISION HISTORY
6.2.   SOURCE CODE DEFINITION
6.2.1. INCLUDES
6.2.2. CONSTANTS AND VARIABLES
6.2.3. FUNCTIONS
7.     PROGRAMMING STYLE
7.1.   NAMING CONVENTIONS
7.1.1. PERMITTED CHARACTERS WITHIN NAMES
7.1.2. NAME CONSTRUCTION
7.2.   DEFINITION LAYOUT
7.2.1. INDENTING POLICY
7.3.   STRUCTURE
7.4.   DIFFERING ACTIONS DEPENDING ON MODE
7.5.   STACK EFFECT ARGUMENTS
7.6.   WORDS THAT RETURN DIFFERENT NUMBERS OF ITEMS
7.7.   CONTROL STRUCTURES
7.8.   USE OF LITERAL VALUES AND "MAGIC NUMBERS"
7.9.   GLOSSARY TEXT
7.10.  VARIABLES, CONSTANTS AND VALUES
8.     AIDS TO VERIFICATION AND VALIDATION
9.     CERTIFICATION OF SOFTWARE

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.  INTRODUCTION

The goal of authoring software is to write all documentation as part of the
source code in the form of comments. External documentation should be
automatically derivable from the source code. To enable this requires that
all sources conform to a standard layout and coding and commenting style.

The aim of this standard is to make the task of reviewing and certifying
software easier. In achieving the aims of this standard, certain styles of
software source layout, programming and commenting style are mandated.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.  SCOPE

This document provides guidance on the construction of software source code
in order to meet the security, quality and integrity objectives of Europay
International. Following this guidance should result in software source
listings that are easy to read and understand by being presented in a
standard format. This document is mandated for application providers and
highly recommended for Kernel providers.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.  REFERENCE DOCUMENTS

  1. ANS X3.215 "Information Systems - Programming Language - Forth" 1994
  2. ISO/IEC 15145 "Information Technology - Programming Languages - FORTH"
     (=ISO/IEC DIS 15145:1995) 1995
  3. "Thinking Forth" Brodie, Leo. 1984 (ISBN 0-13-917568-7)

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.  GLOSSARY OF TERMS

The following terms are used within this document:

ANS        American National Standard
ApplicationSoftware that implements a system product. Applications
           are comprised of modules.
BS         British Standard
EN         Comite’ Europe’en de Normalisation
IEC        International Electrotechnical Commission
IOR        Result of an I/O operation (a flag value that conveys
           information about the type of failure, if any, from an
           operation with I/O device).
ISO        International Standards Organization
Lexicon    The words of a modular component made visible to other
           modules.
Library    A set of high-level software functions with a published
           interface.
Object     References within this document to objects relate to
           Method-Objects and not Data-objects. Method objects may
           relate to specific standard method for performing a task.
Word-set   A set of Forth definitions grouped together under a name
           indicating some shared aspect, typically their common
           functional area.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

5.  SOFTWARE STANDARDS APPLICABLE

All software shall conform to recognized standards for the language in which
the coding is described. The International, European and National standards
that are accepted as being applicable are ISO, IEC, EN, ANS and BS. Company
standards, where generated to provide specific standardized practices, shall
take precedence. Specification documents shall state which standards are
applicable.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

6.  SOFTWARE LISTING ORGANIZATION

Software listings shall utilize the format from the template files
(TEMPLATE.FTH for text files or TEMPLATE.SCR for screen files) which
provides the basic framework for the required document tracking information.

Listings should be structured hierarchically, like a well-written and
organized book. Each listing should clearly relate to the specification
document from which the requirements are drawn. The author of the software
listing shall provide clear aids to the trace-ability of the software to its
requirement's specification wherever possible. This shall include glossary
entry text, further non-glossary descriptions and references to sections or
paragraphs of the specification document.

6.1.  DOCUMENT AUDIT INFORMATION

6.1.1  TITLE BLOCK

The title block contains the company identification and copyright notice
sections of the listing template. The title block is an embedded form, which
requires standardized information to be filled out. This information
identifies part of the trace-ability to the requirement specification and
gives basic details about the listing.

6.1.2  INTRODUCTORY OUTLINE

Each source file will contain a lexicographically complete set of functions
for an application area. The Introductory outline will concisely describe
the contents of the file. This shall be limited to a maximum of 100 words or
as far as the first page break in a text file and one screen in a block
file. The text for the introduction could be copied from the related
specification document if such text concisely describes the listing
contents.

6.1.3  EXPORTS

This shall provide a list of functions that are available for use by other
modules. This is not necessarily the entire list of functions defined within
the listing. Some functions within this listing may only be suitable for
local usage.

6.1.4  ENVIRONMENTAL DEPENDENCIES

This shall list the specific non-standard words or word-sets required. It
shall also define specific hardware requirements and their access
arrangements for the functions specified within the listing.

6.1.5  REVISION HISTORY

The revision history shall be listed in reverse chronological order. Each
item of revision shall be categorized for its effect (either as Major, Minor
or Trivial) within the description of change(s) made. Rules for revision
history cleansing is to be formulated through discussion.

6.2.  SOURCE CODE DEFINITION

6.2.1.  INCLUDES

Pre-load command list to include all other software sources required in
building this module.

6.2.2.  CONSTANTS AND VARIABLES

A list of Constants and Variables that are first used within the current
source file or screen.

6.2.3.  FUNCTIONS

In Forth, Functions are named sub-routines, also known as Words. The name of
each function shall be as descriptive of what the function does as is
practical. Functions may be colon definitions or assembler code definitions.

Each function definition is in the form of the following, see also colon
definition in reference document 1.

    : <name> (S input-stack --- output-stack) (R --- )
             (G descriptive glossary text)
      f1 f2  ( interim stack picture) \ programmers explanatory comment
      .. fn ;

Where:

    :           begins a colon definition.
    <name>      is the name of the function.
    (S          is a data stack comment.
    input stack is a list of input stack items separated by a space
                character between each item.
    output stackis a list of output stack items returned by the function
                with a space character between each item.
    (R          is a return stack comment.
    (G          is the glossary text entry comment.
    f1 f2 .. fn are pre-defined functions.
    interim     expected intermediate state of the functions stack elements.
    stack       (S and (R may be used to distinguish data and return stacks.
    picture
    programmers A concise comment about the immediate line of source code
    explanatory which explains what is happening.
    comment
    ;           ends a colon definition.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

7.  PROGRAMMING STYLE

7.1.  NAMING CONVENTIONS

Names for colon or code definitions shall relate to the functional aspects
of the definition in a manner that reflects what function the definition
performs rather than how the function is performed. Names shall be
English-based and as short as possible, long enough for clarity but no
longer than 31 characters.

7.1.1.  PERMITTED CHARACTERS WITHIN NAMES

The following list of Graphic Characters, extracted from reference document
1, are the only characters permitted for use within Forth definitions.

  !"#$%&’()*+,-./ digits [0-9]:;<=>? @ ALPHA [A-Z] [\]^_‘ alpha [a-z] {|}~

These are represented by ASCII character codes 0x21 to 0x7E inclusive.

Use of Control Characters or any Graphic Characters outside of the above
range within definition names is prohibited.

7.1.2.  NAME CONSTRUCTION

Words for applications are of two types: those, which are contained within a
module and those which are not. Use of modular constructs is highly
recommended for application code. Similar objects shall be contained within
the same module. The similarity shall be judged on the object type that is
to be handled. These are usually based on standards or written procedures.

7.2.  DEFINITION LAYOUT

The body of a definition should be constructed with respect for the phrasing
embodied within natural English. This uses words as if they were a
collection of nouns or verbs with adjectives and adverbs as modifiers. White
space in the definition is an important aspect of the readability of source
text.

A definition should, ideally, be kept short. In no circumstances shall a
definition extend for more than one page (approximately 50 lines of 12pt
text, allowing for header and footer margins) and shall not occupy more than
80 characters in width.

7.2.1.  INDENTING POLICY

The colon of a colon definition shall begin in the left-most position
against the page's left margin. The main body of the definition shall be
indented by one tab stop, which shall be set at 3 character spaces. Each
control structure shall indent further from this by 3 characters for each
subsequent indenting level, see section 7.7 for maximum depth of a control
structure. Tab stops shall be implemented as hard space characters.

7.3.  STRUCTURE

All programming shall follow the rules of Structured Programming. Each
definition is highly recommended to have only one entry point and only one
exit point except for where errors occur that require system state
re-establishment. Exceptions and error conditions for which no IOR are
foreseen shall be handled only by the standard exception handling mechanisms
of CATCH and THROW and any logical extensions of those words.

7.4.  DIFFERING ACTIONS DEPENDING ON MODE

Where a word being defined is intended to perform different actions,
dependent upon whether it's in compilation or execution or any other state,
the stack effects for each state shall be given on separate lines and the
state to which the stack effects relate denoted in a comment. Order of
listing preferred is Compiling then Executing.

    : ARRAY
      CREATE (S x-size y-size ---)               \ compiling
      ...... .........
      DOES>  (S x-offset y-offset --- a-addr)    \ executing
      ...... ......... ;

7.5.  STACK EFFECT ARGUMENTS

All data stack effect arguments shall be commented for all words defined,
even if there is a null effect and no arguments are consumed or produced by
the word. The stack effect arguments shall indicate the type parameter being
passed, if any. The "Data types" nomenclature of the table in reference
document 1 are recommended for denoting stack parameter data type. Other
nomenclature may be used, but when used shall be as plainly indicative as is
practical. A space character shall separate stack items. Hyphenation of data
type nomenclature is permissible.

The effects on the Return Stack shall be indicated when words that affect
the Return Stack such as >R, R> and R@ are used.

7.6.  WORDS THAT RETURN DIFFERENT NUMBERS OF ITEMS

Words that return different numbers of items shall have both versions of
their stack effects indicated on separate lines, e.g.:

    : ?RX (S --- char true)    \ character present
          (S --- false)        \ character not present
      ...... ......... ;

Additional comments may appear to right of stack effect comments to provide
further explanation. Use of such words in an application shall be minimized.

7.7.  CONTROL STRUCTURES

Control structures include all branching requirements for program control
flow, including loops. The maximum depth of nesting control structures
within a single definition is highly recommended to be limited to three.
Requiring more than two nesting levels usually indicates the need to
consider further factorization.

7.8.  USE OF LITERAL VALUES AND "MAGIC NUMBERS"

Use of "magic numbers" or literals within the body of a function definition
is not permitted. All required numbers shall be derived or contained within
pre-defined constants. This eases the process of making changes to these
values by changing just the value stored in the appropriate constant.

7.9.  GLOSSARY TEXT

All words shall be accompanied by clear, concise explanatory text in the
form of a glossary text entry, which may be extracted later by automated
tools that aid in the generation of user documentation. Glossary text shall
refer to the declared stack effects of a word, if any, and declare any
exceptions that might be generated by the function for non-valid parameters.

7.10.  VARIABLES, CONSTANTS AND VALUES

Variables and Constants are ways of providing named number placeholders.
Good design of a program, within Forth, will minimize reliance on the use of
CONSTANT or VARIABLE as much as practical. However, where they are needed
then the following guidelines will assist in their use.

  a. Variables, Constants and Values should be defined local to where they
     are used the first time.
  b. Always initialize a VARIABLE to some value when it is initially
     declared.
  c. For the piece of code, in which a variable or value is used (which may
     deal with a specific function), create an initialization word for each
     functional section, doing this will reduce the size of the top-level
     initialization word and make code management easier.
  d. Always perform the top-level initialization with a GO or RUN word.

This way, if parts of the hierarchy are used within several applications
then you will not miss any if you change something and create a new variable
that will need initialization.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

8.  AIDS TO VERIFICATION AND VALIDATION

   * Test Scripts
   * Checklists
   * Pre-validated Test Data
   * Random Test Data

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

9.  CERTIFICATION OF SOFTWARE

Software certification is a declaration that all software described within a
source listing is complete, performs its functions without error, is
resilient against out-of-bounds stimuli and has no unresolved references.
The certificate also declares that the functions performed comply with the
requirements as described in the specification document.

Certification is applied in a multi-staged process that examines the
resultant code formally in Static and Dynamic testing regimes in accordance
with a test script designed to prove compliance. All certification
processes, consequently, require deriving the assurances they give about the
software from a full and thorough audit trail tracing the design and
development process from requirement's specification to final product. For
this reason version and change control management systems, manual or
auto